Exercise 3 – Semantic Analysis
Compilation 0368-3133
Due 18/12/2025, before 23:59
1 Assignment Overview
The third exercise implements a semantic analyzer that recursively scans the AST produced by CUP, and
checks if it contains any semantic errors. The semantic analyzer takes as input a single text file containing
a L program, and outputs a single text file indicating whether the program is semantically valid. When the
input program is semantically valid, the semantic analyzer adds metadata to the abstract syntax tree, which
is needed for later phases. The added metadata content will not be checked in this exercise. However, if you
have time, it is recommended to implement this addition in Exercise 3. In Tutorial 6, we will discuss which
semantic information should be attached to AST nodes.
2 The L Semantics
This section describes the semantics of L, and provides a multitude of legal and illegal example programs.
To fully understand the exercise requirements, please refer to Tutorial 5 on semantic analysis. Read the
assignment carefully and make sure your implementation enforces all the semantic rules described in this
document.
2.1 Types
Primitive types: The L programming language defines two primitive types: integers and strings.
Composite types: Additional types may be defined as follows:
• Classes: declared with data members and methods.
• Arrays: defined over an existing (non-void) type T.
Class and array definitions may appear only in the global scope. Any use of a class type or array type
(including variable declarations, field declarations, parameter types, return types, and array element types)
is legal only if that type has been previously defined in the global scope.
Void: The type void can only be used as a function return type. Variables cannot have type void (lo-
cal/global variables, parameters, class fields).
2.2 Classes
Ordering and inheritance rules in classes:
• A class can extend only previously defined classes. In particular, the class hierarchy has a tree structure,
and no class directly or indirectly extends itself.
• Within a class declaration, a field or method can only be referenced after it has been defined.
Table 1 provides examples illustrating these rules.
1
Allocating a class: A class is allocated using new T, with the following rules:
• T is a previously defined class.
• The resulting type of the allocation is the class T.
Accessing a class: Members of a class can be accessed using v.f, with the following rules:
• The variable v must have a class type.
• The name f must be a previously defined member of that class or one of its superclasses.
• The resulting type is the field’s type (for fields) or the method’s return type (for methods).
Method overloading, overriding and shadowing:
• Method overloading (defining multiple methods with the same name but different signatures in the
same class) is illegal.
• Method overriding (redefining a method inherited from a superclass in a derived class) is allowed.
When overriding a method, the return type and the types and order of arguments must match exactly
the original method in the superclass. Subclass substitutions in the signature are not allowed.
• Shadowing is not allowed:
– It is illegal for a class to define a field with the same name as an existing field or method in the
same class or any of its superclasses.
– It is illegal for a class to define a method with the same name as an existing field in the same
class or any of its superclasses.
Table 2 summarizes these facts.
Inheritance If class Son is derived from class Father, then any place in the program that semantically
allows an expression of type Father, should semantically allow an expression of type Son. Note that transi-
tivity applies: if class Father is derived from class Grandfather, then class Son is also (indirectly) derived
from class Grandfather. For example, see Table 3.
Nil: Any place in the program that semantically allows an expression of type class, should semantically
allow nil instead. For example, see Table 4.
2.3 Arrays
An array type must be defined over a previously declared (non-void) type. For example, a one-dimensional
integer array:
array IntArray = int[];
And a two-dimensional integer array (array of arrays):
array IntMat = IntArray[];
Allocating an array: An array is allocated using new T[e], with the following rules:
• T is a previously declared type.
• The size expression e must be of type int.
• If e is a constant expression, it must be greater than 0.
2
Accessing an array: Elements of an array can be accessed using v[e], with the following rules:
• The type of the variable v must be of an array.
• The subscript expression e must be of type int.
• If e is a constant expression, it must be greater than or equal to zero
• The resulting type is the element type T of the array that v is defined over.
Non-interchangeable types: If two array types are defined over the same element type T, they are
considered distinct and are not interchangeable. This means that even if two arrays store the same type of
elements, each array type is treated separately by the type system. For example, see Table 5.
Nil: Any place in the program that semantically allows an expression of type array, should semantically
allow nil instead. For example, see Table 6.
2.4 Assignments
An assignment x := e is legal when the type of expression e is compatible with the type of variable x.
• For primitive types, this requires that x and e have exactly the same type.
• For arrays, if e = new T, then x must be of type array defined over type T. Note that subclass substi-
tutions are not allowed. Otherwise, x and e have exactly the same type.
• For class types, either x and e have the same type, or the type of e is a subclass of the type of x (e.g.,
if Son derives from Father, a variable of type Father can be assigned a value of type Son).
• Recall that assigning nil to array and class variables is legal. However, assigning nil to int and string
variables is illegal.
Table 7 provides examples illustrating these rules.
2.5 Functions and Control Structures
If and While: The type of the condition inside if and while statements is the primitive type int.
Return Statements: According to the syntax of L, return statements can only be found inside functions.
Since functions can not be nested, it follows that a return statement belongs to exactly one function.
• If a function has return type void, its return statements must be empty (return;).
• If a function has a non-void return type T, then every return statement must return an expression
whose type is compatible with type T.
A function/method may have control flow paths without a return statement, even if the return type of
the function is not void. For example, the following function is semantically valid:
int f(int x) {
if (x = 7) {
return 1;
}
}
3
Function and method Calls: Only previously defined functions or methods can be called. When calling
a function or method, each argument must have a type compatible with the corresponding parameter in
its signature. The type of a function or method call expression is the return type of the called function or
method.
2.6 Operators
Binary Operations: The binary operations -,*,/,<,> are performed only between integers. The only
exception is the + binary operation, which can be performed between two integers or between two strings.
The resulting type of a semantically valid binary operation is the primitive type int, with the single exception
of adding two strings, where the resulting type is a string. When performing division (using the / operator),
if the divisor is a constant, it must not be 0. Table 9 summarizes these facts.
Equality Testing: Equality testing (=) is legal only when the two expressions are comparable.
• For primitive types and arrays, this requires that both expressions have exactly the same type.
• For class types, this requires that either both expressions have exactly the same class type, or that the
type of one expression is a subclass of the type of the other expression. For example, if class Son is
derived from class Father, then an expression of type Father can be compared for equality with an
expression of type Son, and vice versa.
• The resulting type of a semantically valid comparison is the primitive type int.
• Recall that an expression of an array or class type may be tested for equality with nil. However,
comparing nil to variables of type int or string is illegal.
Table 8 summarizes these facts.
2.7 Scope Rules
L defines four kinds of scopes:
1. if, else and while block scopes
2. Function scopes
3. Class scopes
4. The global scope
Table 10 summarizes key points from this section.
Identifier declarations: An identifier may appear only once in a given scope. Different scopes may
contain declarations with the same name. An identifier cannot use a reserved keyword, including primitive
type names. In L, all identifiers share a single namespace, including type names, variable names, and function
names. This means a single name cannot be used for more than one of these at the same time.
Name resolution: When an identifier is used, its declaration is resolved by searching from the innermost
scope outward, ending with the global scope. The only exception to this is inside a class scope (see below).
Once a class is declared, it can be referenced within its own declaration body. Similarly, a function can call
itself recursively. If no declaration is found for an identifier, it is considered a semantic error.
Global scope: Only the global scope may contain:
4
• Class and array type declarations
• Global variables
• Function definitions
Each name must be distinct from all other global names, reserved keywords, and library function names
(PrintInt, PrintString).
Name resolution in class scope: When referring to a name within a class declaration:
1. The search starts in the class scope itself.
2. Then continues along the chain of members in its superclass(es).
3. Finally, it moves to the global scope if the name is not found in the class hierarchy.
2.8 Library Functions
L defines the following library functions: PrintInt and PrintString.
The signatures of these functions are as follows:
void PrintInt(int i) { ... }
void PrintString(string s){ ... }
Library functions are treated as if they are defined in the global scope.
3 Input and Output
Input: The input for this exercise is a single text file, the input L program.
Output: The output is a single text file that contains a single word:
• When the input program is semantically correct: OK
• When there is a lexical error: ERROR
• When there is a syntax or semantic error: ERROR(location)
where location is the line number of the first error that was encountered. In case of a semantic error,
you may assume that if an error occurs, the entire command or construct containing the error is in the
same line.
4 Submission Guidelines
Each group should have only one student submit the solution via the course Moodle. Submit all your code
in a single zip file named <ID>.zip, where <ID> is the ID of the submitting student. The zip file must have
the following structure at the top level:
1. A text file named ids.txt containing the IDs of all team members (one ID per line).
2. A folder named ex3/ containing all your source code.
Inside the ex3 folder, include a makefile at ex3/Makefile. This makefile must build your source files
into the semantic analyzer, which should be a runnable jar file located at ex3/SEMANT (note the lack of .jar
suffix). You may reuse the makefile provided in the skeleton, or create a new one if you prefer.
5
Command-line usage: SEMANT receives 2 parameters (file paths):
• input (input file path)
• output (output file path containing the expected output)
Self-check script: Before submitting, you must run the self-check script provided with this exercise.
This script verifies that your source code compiles successfully using your makefile and passes several
provided tests. You must execute the self-check on your submission zip file within the school server
(nova.cs.tau.ac.il) and ensure that your submission passes all checks. Follow these steps:
1. Download self-check-ex3.zip from the course Moodle and place it in the same directory as your
submission zip file. Make sure no other files are present in that directory.
2. Run the following commands:
unzip self-check-ex3.zip
python self-check.py
Make sure that your ids.txt file follows the required format, and that your makefile does not contain
hard-coded paths. The self-check script does not verify these aspects automatically and you are responsible
for ensuring that your code compiles correctly in any directory.
Note: The script fails if any provided test fails. If the failure is not due to the output
format and you cannot pass all tests by the submission date, it is still acceptable to submit.
Submissions that fail to compile or do not produce the required runnable will receive a
grade of 0, and resubmissions will not be allowed.
5 Starter Code
The exercise skeleton can be found in the repository for this exercise. The skeleton provides a basic semantic
analyzer, which you may modify as needed. Some files of interest in the provided skeleton:
• src/ast/*.java (Classes for the AST nodes with an additional semantMe method, implementing the
AST visitor pattern described in tutorial 5.)
• src/types/*.java (Classes for the different types returned by the semantMe method.)
• src/symboltable/*.java (Hash table-based symbol table implementation available for you to use.
You may modify the code as needed.)
• The input and expected output folders contain input tests and their expected results.
Note that you need to use your own LEX and CUP configuration files from previous exercises, as well as
your own AST nodes classes, as the ones in the skeleton provide only a partial implementation.
Building and running the skeleton: From the ex3 directory, run:
$ make
This performs the following steps:
• Generates the relevant files using jflex/cup
• Compiles the modules into SEMANT
For debugging, run:
6
$ make debug
This performs the following additional steps:
• Runs SEMANT on input/Input.txt
• Runs SEMANT on input/Input.txt
• Generates an image of the resulting syntax tree
• Generates an image of the resulting syntax tree
• Generates images describing the changes in the symbol table
• Generates images desc